---
layout: single
title: "Miscellaneous tools"
permalink: /critic2/manual/misc/
excerpt: "Miscellaneous tools in critic2."
sidebar:
  nav: "critic2_manual"
categories: critic2 manual misc
toc: true
toc_label: "Miscellaneous tools"
toc_sticky: true
---

## Molecular calculations (MOLCALC) {#c2-molcalc}

~~~
MOLCALC [NELEC]
MOLCALC PEACH
  mo1a [->] mo1r k1
  mo2a [->] mo2r k2
  [...]
ENDMOLCALC/END
MOLCALC expr.s
MOLCALC HF
~~~
This keyword allows the calculation of molecular quantities. Mostly
using molecular wavefunction (wfn/wfx/fchk/molden) fields and
Becke-style grids, but crystals can also be used.

The NELEC keyword integrates the number of electrons. This is useful
for debugging purposes.

If an expression (expr.s) is used, the scalar field generated by it is
integrated in the molecular mesh.

The PEACH keyword calculates the index for the characterization of
electronic excitations based on orbital overlap defined as uppercase
lambda in Peach et al., J. Chem. Phys. 128 (2008) 044118. Small values
(close to zero) correspond to little orbital overlap and Rydberg
excitations. Large values (close to one) are caused by high orbital
overlap and correspond to local excitations. Charge transfer
excitations can have both high or low PEACH value. Each line gives the
initial (mo1a) and final (mo1r) molecular orbital and the oscillator
strength (k1) for each component of the excitation. If Gaussian is
used, copying and pasting the output of the TD keyword is
recommended. Using the PEACH keyword requires the virtual orbitals,
which in turn requires using a fchk or molden file format with the
READVIRTUAL keyword (see `Loading a field (LOAD)`_).

MOLCALC HF calculates the Hartree-Fock energy from the basis set
information in the reference field using molecular integrals, which
are in turn calculated by the libCINT library. Using this keyword
requires compiling with critic2 with libCINT (see the README). At this
moment, this keyword serves mostly for testing, debug, and development
purposes, as it is very inefficient. The routine called by this
keyword shows how to use libCINT inside critic. Only molecular
wavefunctions can be used with MOLCALC HF and only file formats that
provied basis set information (right now, only Gaussian fchk, but
molden-style files could be implemented). Gaussian wfn/wfx do not
provide basis set shells, only primitives, so they cannot be used with
MOLCALC HF.

## Hirshfeld charges (HIRSHFELD) {#c2-hirshfeld}

~~~
HIRSHFELD
~~~
Calculate the Hirshfeld charges. Only for fields on a grid.

## The exchange-hole dipole moment (XDM) model of dispersion {#c2-xdm}

The XDM module calculates the dispersion energy using the
exchange-hole dipole moment (XDM) model. See J. Chem. Phys. 127,
154108 (2007), J. Chem. Phys. 136, 174109 (2012), and
J. Chem. Phys. 138, 204109 (2013) for more details.

~~~
XDM GRID [RHO irho.s] [TAU itau.s] [ELF ielf.s] 
    [PDENS ipdens.s] [CORE icor.s] [LAP ilap.s] 
    [GRAD igrad.s] [RHOAE irhoae.s] [XB ib.s] 
    [XA1 a1.r] [XA2 a2.r] [ONLYC] [UPTO {6|8|10}]
XDM QE [BETWEEN at1.i at1.i ... AND at1.i at2.i ...]
XDM a1.r a2.r chf.s
~~~
There are three modes for the XDM keyword. In QE, the coefficients are
read from a Quantum ESPRESSO output (loaded using CRYSTAL), and the
XDM energy is recalculated. If BETWEEN and AND are given only the
dispersion interaction between those pairs of atoms is calculated.
This keyword is used mostly for testing purposes. In GRID, the
information necessary to calculate the XDM dispersion energy and
related quantities is provided using grid fields. Otherwise, a
molecular XDM calculation is assumed, with damping function
coefficients a1.r and a2.r and functional selector chf.s. The latter
can be either a keyword for a functional (blyp, b3lyp, etc.) or a
number between 0 and 1 indicating the fraction of exact exchange. The
molecular XDM code can be used only with wavefunction fields and DFTB
fields.

The rest of the information in this section applies to the XDM GRID
keyword. 

XDM uses the electron density (RHO), the kinetic energy density (TAU),
the Laplacian (LAP), and the gradient of the electron density (GRAD)
to compute the exchange-hole dipole moment in the Becke-Roussel model
(B). The promolecular density (PDENS) and the core density (CORE) are
used to calculate a Hirshfeld partitioning of the unit cell. All of
these fields have to be available or are calculated when running
XDM. The corresponding keywords accept an integer, corresponding to a
previously LOADed field. During the XDM run, cubes for all of these
fields are generated so they can be loaded in subsequent runs. Note
that the PDENS cube is the same as generated in NCIPLOT (except for
changes in size).

The list of requierements is:

* RHO: the electron density. By default, irho.s is the reference
  field. This field is required in XDM. It is also required to give
  the pseudopotential charges using the ZPSP keyword for all types of
  atoms in the system.

* TAU: the kinetic energy density. It is used in the calculation of B,
  and can be extracted from the ELF. Hence, it is required except if
  the ELF or the B is given. If the ELF is used instead of TAU, a cube
  file (-tau.cube) is written.

* ELF: the electron localization function. Can be used in place of
  TAU. This is useful because most programs (e.g. QE, VASP) generate
  cubes for the ELF but not for the kinetic energy density.

* PDENS: the promolecular density. It is generated by critic2 if not
  present in the XDM call, and written to a cube file (-pdens.cube)
  for future use.

* CORE: the core density. It is generated by critic2 if not present in
  the XDM call and written to a cube (-core.cube), unless the B and
  RHOAE are given, in which case it is ignored. The ZPSP of all atoms
  is required in order to calculate this quantity.

* LAP: the Laplacian of the electron density. It is generated by
  Fourier transform of RHO unless it is given or B is given, in which
  case it is not needed and its calculation is skipped.

* GRAD: the gradient of the electron density. It is generated from RHO
  unless B is given. If B is available, the calculation of GRAD is
  skipped.

* RHOAE: the all-electron density on a cube. If given, replaces the
  pseudo-density plus core in the calculation of the atomic volumes.

* XB: the exchange-hole dipole moment in the Becke-Roussel
  model. Calculated from the above unless given.

The usual way of running XDM for the first time is:

~~~
CRYSTAL rho.cube
ZPSP C 4 O 6 H 1
LOAD rho.cube
LOAD elf.cube
XDM GRID elf 2
~~~
This generates several cube files: root-tau.cube, root-pdens.cube,
root-core.cube, root-lap.cube, root-grad.cube, and
root-b.cube. Subsequent runs can circumvent the calculation of B,
PDENS, and CORE by doing:

~~~
CRYSTAL rho.cube
ZPSP C 4 O 6 H 1
LOAD rho.cube
LOAD root-b.cube
LOAD root-pdens.cube
LOAD root-core.cube
XDM GRID XB 2 PDENS 3 CORE 4
~~~
Note that passing RHO 1 is not necessary because rho.cube is the first
field loaded (hence the reference) and assumed by default to be the
density by XDM. Again: the ZPSP of all atoms are needed for an XDM
calculation. Also, only closed-shell (non-spinpolarized) systems can
be calculated for now. During the calculation, cubes for almost all
the properties above are generated so they can be reused in future
calculations. The other options are:
~~~
XA1 [a1.r]
~~~
The value of the a1 damping parameter (adimensional). Default:
0.6836 (PW86PBE parametrization for QE).
~~~
XA2 [a2.r]
~~~
The value of the a1 damping parameter (in angstrom). Default:
1.5045 (PW86PBE parametrization for QE).
~~~
ONLYC
~~~
Calculate the dispersion coefficients but not the dispersion
energy, forces, and stress. By default, they are calculated.
~~~
UPTO {6|8|10}
~~~
Only calculate the contributions to the energy coming from the C6
term (6), from the C6 and C8 terms (8) and from C6, C8, and C10
(10). The latter is the default.

## Control commands and options {#c2-control}

~~~
ODE_MODE [METHOD {EULER|HEUN|BS|RKCK|DP}] [MAXSTEP maxstep.r] 
         [MAXERR maxerr.r] [GRADEPS gradeps.r]
~~~
Select the gradient path integration algorithm and its
parameters. EULER selects plain explicit Euler (1 evaulation per step)
with a poor man's technique for the step size adaptation. HEUN, Heun's
method (2 evaluations), with the same size adaptation as Euler's. BS,
Bogacki-Shampine's embedded 2(3)th-order method with error estimation
and first step as last. RKCK, Runge-Kutta-Cash-Karp embedded 4-5th
order method with local extrapolation and error estimate. DP,
Dormand-Prince 4-5th order with local extrapolation and error estimate
(7 evaluations per step). maxstep.r is the initial (and maximum) step
size (bohr in crystals, angstrom in molecules), gradeps.r is the
gradient norm termination criterion for the gradient path. maxerr.r is
the maximum error in the trajectory (in bohr). MAXERR only affects
methods that provide an error estimate for the predicted steps: BS,
RKCK, and DP.

This keyword applies to all gradient paths except those in qtree. The
defaults are BS method with maxstep.r = 0.3 bohr, gradeps.r = 1e-7,
and maxerr.r = 1e-5.

~~~
PRUNE_DISTANCE prune.r
~~~
Prune gradient paths so that only one point is plotted every prune.r
distance (units: bohr in crystals and angstrom in molecules, default:
0.1 bohr). Gradient paths are forced to have steps of length less than
or equal to prune.r. Therefore, a very small PRUNE_DISTANCE will
result in slow gradient path tracing.

~~~
INT_RADIAL [TYPE {GAULEG|QAGS|QNG|QAG}] [NR nr.r]
           [ABSERR aerr.r] [RELERR rerr.r]
           [ERRPROP prop.i]
           [PREC delta.r]
~~~
Choose the radial integration method (e.g. inside spheres or
basins). The TYPE keyword selects the qudrature method:

+ GAULEG: Gauss-Legendre.

+ QAGS: quadpack's dqags (general-purpose, extrapolation, globally
  adaptive, end-point singularities). All Q methods are sometimes
  unstable for heavy atoms and big beta-spheres, but this does not
  happen very often.

+ QNG: quadpack's dqng (smooth integrand, non-adaptive,
  Gauss-Kronrod(Patterson))

+ QAG: quadpack's dqag (general-purpose, integrand examiner,
  globally adaptive, Gauss-Kronrod)

The number of radial integration points, if appropriate (GAULEG,QAG)
is selected with NR. If the selected method is QAG, the number of
points may vary from nr.r. The allowed intervals are: 7 - 15, 10 -
21, 15 - 31, 20 - 41, 25 - 51, 30 - 61. Critic2 selects the
appropriate interval by comparing the given nr.r to the lower
limits of these intervals.

ABSERR is the requested absolute error for QUADPACK
integrators. RELERR is the requested relative error for QUADPACK
integrators. ERRPROP controls the property for which the error is
estimated. If prop.i corresponds to one of the integrable properties
then RELERR and ABSERR apply only to it. The selected property
guides the adaptive integration procedure. If prop.i does not
represent one of the integrable properties, the maximum of the
absolute value of the properties vector is used.  Note : the option
where max(abs(prop)) is used is unstable. Some spheres (usually
associated to heavy atoms) may integrate to nonsense, depending on
the optimization levels of the compiler. Therefore, I have disabled
it by default.

In the case of basin integrations, PREC controls the precision in
the determination of the interatomic surface (bohr in crystal,
angstrom in molecules).

Default: GAULEG, nr.r = 50, aerr.r = 1d0, rerr.r = 1d-12. The default
errprop is the field value and the Laplacian. delta.r = 1e-5 bohr.

~~~
MESHTYPE {BECKE|FRANCHINI {1|2|3|4|5}}
~~~
Choose the type and quality of the molecular integration mesh. These
meshes are used in molecular and crystals to calculate integrals over
the whole space (cell in crystals, R3 in molecules - used in XDM), and
for the MESH seeding option in AUTO.

+ BECKE: Becke-style integration grids with the same quality
  parameters as in postg. As currently implemented, it is quite slow
  and only available for molecules. If this option is chosen,
  FRANCHINI 3 is used by default for crystals. 

+ FRANCHINI: a Becke-style molecular mesh with weights and quality 
  parameters adapted from Franchini et al. J. Comput. Chem. 34 (2013)
  1819. Works for molecules and crystals, and it is relatively
  efficient. No pruning is done yet. The number after the keyword is
  hte quality selector, that controls the size of the mesh and the
  accuracy of the integration.  The values are 1 (small), 2 (normal),
  3 (good), 4(very good), 5 (excellent).

Default: FRANCHINI with lvl = 3 (good accuracy).

~~~
PRECISECUBE|STANDARDCUBE
~~~
The field values in cube files written by Gaussian are written in
exponential format with six significan digits. This precision may not
be enough for some applications, particularly involving energies. The
default behavior of critic2 (corresponding to the PRECISECUBE keyword)
is to write cubes with 14 significant digits. Some other programs that
use Gaussian cube files may not like this, however, so the keyword
STANDARDCUBE is provided to make critic2 write cube files in the
default Gaussian format.

~~~
BONDFACTOR bondfactor.r
~~~
Critic2 considers two atoms are covalently bonded if their distance is
less than the sum of their covalent radii times bondfactor.r (default:
1.4). The maximum bondfactor allowed is 2.0.

~~~
RADII [at1.s|z1.i] rad1.r [[at2.s|z2.i] rad2.r ...]
~~~
Sets the covalent radii of atoms with atomic symbol at1.s or atomic
number z1.i to rad1.r. (Units: bohr in crystals, angstroms in
molecules). The radii of several atoms can be changed in the same
command.

~~~
ROOT root.s
~~~
Change the <root>. The root is used as prefix for most of the
auxiliary files written by critic2.

~~~
SUM [id.s]
MAX [id.s]
MIN [id.s]
MEAN [id.s]
COUNT id.s eps.r
~~~
Using the field on a grid id.s, calculate the sum of the node values
(SUM), the maximum value (MAX), the minimum (MIN), the average
(MEAN), or count the number of elements that are greater than eps.r
(COUNT). If no id.s is given in the first four commands, use the
reference field. 

~~~
BENCHMARK [nn.i]
~~~
Benchmark the speed of the field calculation using nn.i points
(default: 10000)

~~~
{RUN|SYSTEM} command.s
~~~
Execute a shell command.

~~~
ECHO string.s
~~~
Write the string to the output. Useful for partitioning long outputs.

~~~
expression.s
~~~
If the input is not identified as any of the keywords above, then
evaluate the line as an arithmetic expression. Useful for
simple calculations in the command line (with critic2 -q).

~~~
END
~~~
Terminates the execution.

