---
layout: single
title: "Critic2"
permalink: /critic2/
excerpt: >-
  Analysis of the results of quantum chemical calculations in
  molecules and solids. Critic2 implements crystallographic
  computations, input and output format conversion, Bader analysis,
  critical point search, NCI plots, and much, much more.
sidebar:
  - repo: "critic2"
    nav: "critic2"
search: true
---

Critic2 is a program for the analysis of quantum mechanical
calculation results in molecules and periodic solids.

* The **development version** works only with recent compilers (see
  [here](/critic2/installation/#whichcompilerswork)) but has the latest features.\\
  Version **1.2**:
  [critic2-1.2.zip](https://github.com/aoterodelaroza/critic2/archive/refs/tags/1.2.zip),
  [critic2-1.2.tar.gz](https://github.com/aoterodelaroza/critic2/archive/refs/tags/1.2.tar.gz).

* The **stable version** works with almost any f90/f03 Fortran
  compiler. Only serious bugs are fixed in the stable version, so it
  is seriously outdated by now.\\
  Version **1.1**:
  [critic2-1.1stable.zip](https://github.com/aoterodelaroza/critic2/archive/refs/tags/1.1stable.zip),
  [critic2-1.1stable.tar.gz](https://github.com/aoterodelaroza/critic2/archive/refs/tags/1.1stable.tar.gz).

Alternatively, clone the git repository for the **latest version** of the code:
~~~
git clone https://github.com/aoterodelaroza/critic2.git
~~~
or visit the [github page](https://github.com/aoterodelaroza/critic2).
This manual and the examples refer to the latest version only. If you
find a bug in either the stable or development versions, chances are
it is already fixed in the github repository.

## Features

- Read and transform between file formats used in quantum chemistry
  and physics.

- Read, analyze, and manipulate scalar fields such as the ELF or the
  electron density.

- Perform topological analysis of real-space scalar fields, which includes the
  implementation of Bader's atoms in molecules theory (QTAIM): critical
  point search, basin integration, basin plotting, etc.

- Calculation of Bader's delocalization indices in periodic solids.

- Calculation and integration of new scalar fields using critic2's
  powerful arithmetic expressions, useful in the development of
  quantum mechanical methods.

- Critic2 implements other related techniques, such as non-covalent
  interaction plots (NCIplots) in molecules and solids or the
  calculation of scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) plots.

- Crystallographic calculations: space group detection (via the
  [spglib](https://atztogo.github.io/spglib/)), unit cell
  transformation, powder diffraction and RDFs, structural comparison,
  molecule environment generation, and more.

- Critic2 understands structures and scalar fields generated by many
  programs: WIEN2k, elk, PI, Quantum ESPRESSO, abinit, VASP, DFTB+,
  Gaussian, psi4, orca, siesta, cif, SHELX, and more.

## Files

* `README`: some basic instructions for installing and using the
  program.
* `AUTHORS`: the authors of the package.
* `LICENSE`: a copy of the licence. Critic2 is distributed under the
  GNU/GPL license v3.
* `THANKS`: acknowledgements to various people that contributed code
  or external libraries.
* `src/`: source code. The critic2 binary is generated in here.
* `dat/`: atomic density, cif database, and other data. These need to be
  accessible to critic2 at runtime (either by configuring with the
  `prefix` option or setting the `CRITIC_HOME` environment variable,
  see [Installation](/critic2/installation/).

## Citation

The basic references for critic2 are:

* A. Otero-de-la-Roza, E. R. Johnson and V. Luaña,
  Comput. Phys. Commun. **185**, 1007-1018 (2014)
  <http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cpc.2013.10.026>
* A. Otero-de-la-Roza, M. A. Blanco, A. Martín Pendás and V. Luaña,
  Comput. Phys. Commun. **180**, 157–166 (2009)
  <http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cpc.2008.07.018>

Please cite these if you find this program useful. See the outputs and
the manual for references pertaining particular keywords.

## Copyright

Critic2 is distributed under the GNU/GPL v3 license. The LICENSE file
in the root of the distribution contains a copy of the license.
