---
layout: single
classes: wide
title: "Quick Start Guide"
permalink: /critic2/quickstart/
excerpt: "Basic usage of critic2."
sidebar:
  nav: "critic2"
---

Critic2 reads the user commands from a single input file (the `.cri`
file). A simple input is:
~~~
crystal cubicBN.cube
load cubicBN.cube
yt
~~~
which reads the crystal structure from a cube file (`cubicBN.cube`),
then the electron density from the same cube file, and then calculates
the atomic charges and volumes using the YT method. Critic2 accepts
many structure and density/scalar field formats written by quantum
chemistry software (see the [manual](/critic2/manual/) for more
info). 

To run critic2, do:
~~~
critic2 cubicBN.cri
~~~
This will write to the standard output. Redirect the output to a file
with either of:
~~~
critic2 cubicBN.cri > cubicBN.cro
critic2 cubicBN.cri cubicBN.cro
~~~
Finally, you can just open critic2 and type commands by hand:
~~~
critic2
$ ...
~~~
If you do this, please check out the 
[rlwrap program](https://github.com/hanslub42/rlwrap), which 
will make the interactive usage of critic2 much easier:
~~~
rlwrap critic2
~~~
Rlwrap will provide command history, emacs-style key bindings, and
more.

A detailed description of the keywords accepted by critic2 is given in
the [user's guide](/critic2/manual/) and a list of commands in the
[syntax.txt file](/critic2/syntax/).  The user's guide can also be
found in the `doc/` directory of the critic2 distribution in plain
text format (`user-guide.txt`). A copy of the manual in PDF format
(`user-guide.pdf`) can be generated by running the `compile.sh` script
in the `doc/` subdirectory. This requires a working LaTeX
installation, the rst2latex program (included in the docutils
package), and awk. Several examples are provided in the `examples/`
subdirectory.

