# VC-PWDF walk-through

## Overview
The VC-PWDF method is a protocol that compares two crystal structures and yields a numerical value that is 
related to the similarity of the two structures being compared. The protocol uses the simulated powder 
diffractograms of the two structures in order to yield a dissimilarity value using a cross-correlation 
function (ie. a measure of peak overlap, 
[J. Comput. Chem., 2001, 22, 273](https://doi.org/10.1002/1096-987X(200102)22:3%3C273::AID-JCC1001%3E3.0.CO;2-0)). The value yielded by the method
is a number between 0 (identical) and 1 (completely dissimilar). We have called this value the "VC-PWDF score",
and a score \< 0.03 indicates considerable similarity and a probable match; however, user discretion is 
recommended regarding a cutoff for classifying a "match". The protocol is specifically 
designed to be highly effective for the comparison of crystal structures obtained under different conditions;
low/high temperatures, high pressure, or in silico-generated by force field/MM or electronic structure 
theory/DFT computational methods. 
  
Details on the development, abilities, and applications (identification of target crystal structures in CSP 
landscapes [CrystEngComm, 2021, 23, 7118](https://pubs.rsc.org/en/content/articlehtml/2021/ce/d1ce01058a), 
distinguishing the same structure from polymorph structures in the 
CSD [CrystEngComm, 2022, 24, 8326](https://pubs.rsc.org/en/content/articlehtml/2022/ce/d2ce01080a), 
matching experimental PXRD to crystal structures
 [Chem. Sci., 2023](https://pubs.rsc.org/en/content/articlehtml/2023/sc/d3sc00168g)) are 
provided elsewhere. 

If you find the VC-PWDF method useful, please cite:
- R.A. Mayo, A. Otero de la Roza, and E.R. Johnson, _CrystEngComm_, **2022**, _24_, 8326-8338. 

If you find the VC-xPWDF method useful, please cite:
- R.A. Mayo, K.M. Marczenko, and E.R. Johnson, _Chem. Sci._, **2023**, https://doi.org/10.1039/D3SC00168G. 

In either case, please note your usage of critic2 by citing:
- A. Otero-de-la-Roza, E. R. Johnson and V. Luaña, _Comput. Phys. Commun._, **2014**, _185_, 1007-1018.
- A. Otero-de-la-Roza, M. A. Blanco, A. Martín Pendás and V. Luaña, _Comput. Phys. Commun._, **2009**, _180_, 157–166.

## Limitations
The VC-PWDF method currently only simulates/compares powder diffractograms from Cu K&#945;<sub>1</sub> 
radiation, cannot
be used reliably for disordered structures, and will yield low scores for certain polytype and conformational 
phase structures.

## Prerequisits
It is expected that critic2 has been fully installed and that the user has a basic level of Linux familiarity
(read/write files, command line tools and navigation, conditional statements, for-loops). For a more 
beginner-level walk-through, the [VC-(x)PWDF instruction manual](https://erin-r-johnson.github.io/software/) posted on the Johnson group web page may be useful. 

## Comparing two crystal structures to obtain the VC-PWDF score
### Interactive
Start an instance of critic2 in a working directory containing the two crystal structure files you wish to
compare. The critic2 command `COMPAREVC` is used to initiate the VC-PWDF protocol to compare the two crystal
structures given (see [here](https://aoterodelaroza.github.io/critic2/manual/crystal/) for compatible crystal 
structure file types):
~~~
COMPAREVC xtal1.cif xtal2.cif
~~~
The two crystal structure files that are being compared must be in the working directory, or the relative or 
absolute path to the files can be given.

The printed output includes:
- which structure has been used as the refence and which has been designated the candidate structure, 
- the Niggli reduced cell lattice vectors and cell dimensions, 
- the list of viable lattice vectors of the candidate structure and their matching to the lattice vector(s) 
of the reference structure's Niggli cell,  
- the [POWDIFF](https://aoterodelaroza.github.io/critic2/manual/structure/#c2-compare) results from comparison of the reference structure to the distorted cells of the candidate 
structure, 
- The VC-PWDF score is the lowest POWDIFF result, printed at the very end of the output 
`+ FINAL Diff = <value>`

### Input file
The critic2 commands can be written to an input file (`.cri` extension recommend) and run with critic2 non-
interactively.
~~~
critic2 input.cri
~~~
If your interest is only the VC-PWDF score, piping the output through a `grep` command can give you this value:
~~~
critic2 input.cri | grep FINAL
~~~
Simply pipe the output to a file (`.cro` extension recommended) to save it. Sending the output to be printed 
into a file allows you to review the protocol run, and save the VC-PWDF score in a file to review later if 
necessary.
~~~
critic2 input.cri > output.cro
~~~

## Comparing a list of structures with a target structure
If you are searching a list of structures to see if any match a reference experimental structure that you have 
(eg. a CSP landscape for an experimental structure), one way to do this is to generate all the input files 
with a for loop. Given the example of the following sample directory:
~~~
target.cif	xx03.cif	xx06.cif	xx09.cif	xx12.cif	xx15.cif	
xx01.cif	xx04.cif	xx07.cif	xx10.cif	xx13.cif	xx16.cif
xx02.cif	xx05.cif	xx08.cif	xx11.cif	xx14.cif	xx17.cif
~~~
etc...  where the `target.cif` crystal structure is the reference experimental structure, and the `xx*.cif` 
files were generated computationally, a `for` loop to make all the critic2 input files could look like this:
~~~
for i in xx*.cif ; do echo "COMPAREVC target.cif $i" > ${i%.cif}.cri ; done
~~~
which can be run from the command line. A similar `for` loop can be written to run all the new .cri files 
through critic2:
~~~
for i in *.cri ; do critic2 $i > ${i%.cri}.cro ; done
~~~

If you have a couple thousand structures to compare, running the comparisons in parallel over N processors 
will reduce the total time required to approximately 1/N. This can be done with [parallel](https://www.gnu.org/software/parallel/). If your list of CSP structures is 
all contained within one concatenated file, [csplit](https://www.gnu.org/software/coreutils/manual/html_node/csplit-invocation.html) is ideal for creating a unique file for each structure.

Once output files have been generated, a table of results sorted by lowest VC-PWDF score can be made
with the following line:
~~~
for i in *.cro ; do echo -n "${i%.cro}   " ; grep FINAL $i | awk '{print$5}' ; done | sort -n -k2 > results.txt
~~~

## Generating a file of the distorted crystal structure
If you want to view the overlay of the two crystal structures that yield the VC-PWDF score (as a result of the 
lattice deformation), add `WRITE` to the end of the command:
~~~
COMPAREVC xtal1.cif xtal2.cif WRITE
~~~
 
Two `.res` format files will be generated, one of each of the crystal 
structures that yielded the VC-PWDF score. The crystal structure entered first after the `comparevc` command 
(`xtal1.cif`) will be written
 to the file `stdin_structure_1.res`, and the second structure to `stdin_structure_2.res` (where `stdin` is 
replaced by the `filename` of `filename.cri` if using an input file). Review the output information to 
determine 
whether `xtal1` or `xtal2` was deformed (ie. _not_ the reference). These structures can be viewed in a 
GUI of 
your choice, compared with other methods, etc...

## Plotting the simulated powder diffractograms
A simulated powder diffractogram can be generated for any crystal structure with critic2 by loading the 
crystal structure, then entering the `POWDER` command. 
~~~
crystal stdin_structure_2.res
POWDER
~~~
 
Two files will be generated, a sample gnuplot command file to plot the data with 
[gnuplot](http://www.gnuplot.info/) `stdin_xrd.gnu`, and a two-column file of 2&#952; (°) and intensity `stdin_xrd.dat`.  Use a plotting program of your choice to plot the simulated powder patterns. 
